This repository contains all data and code needed to replicate the experiments presented in "Combinatorial Testing with Dynamically Adaptive Software Systems" by Pierre Martou.

To run this replication package, all needed dependencies are listed in the file "requirements.txt". This code was written in Python 3.9.

# Data (feature models used for the experiments)

In the thesis, we mainly use three running examples, as well as feature models sampled from the S.P.L.O.T. repository (https://www.splot-research.org).

Practically all experimental results (especially those related to the S.P.L.O.T. repository) are stored.  By default, the provided scripts reuse previously computed results when available. 
To recompute all experiments from scratch, all the mentioned methods accept a "recompute" argument; when set to _True_, stored data are ignored and all results are regenerated directly from the feature models.
Note that recomputing results can take a significant time (hours).

The main contributions are to generate, from a feature model: [test suites](./utils/TestSuite.py) with transition coverage (CTT), [alternative execution paths](./TestOracle/AlternativePaths.py) (test oracle), and all [fault localisation executions](./ErrorIsolation/ErrorIsolation.py).
Those are usually stored as pickled data classes (.pkl) with the "pickle" library. The data classes all contain the "store" and "load" methods to pickle and unpickle them more easily, as well as a "get" method to more easily generate those results.

## Running examples

All (context-)feature models are represented in readable text files, typically ("context.txt", "mapping.txt", and) "features.txt".

- Smart Messaging Application: its context-feature models are located in [./data/SmartMessenger](./data/SmartMessenger). It contains three versions, that represent the system's evolution presented in the thesis.

- Risk Information System: there are two versions, one using a context-feature model and one with only the feature model. The context-feature model version is in [./data/RIS](./data/RIS), and the other in [./data/RIS-FOP](./data/RIS-FOP).

- Medical Appointment Manager: its feature model is in [./data/MedicalAppointmentManager](./data/MedicalAppointmentManager).

## S.P.L.O.T. feature models

The original models retrieved from the SPLOT repository (xml files) are stored in [./data/SPLOT/SPLOT-source](./data/SPLOT/SPLOT-source).

To use them, we formatted them in the same format as the running examples, in the text files. 
The formatted SPLOT models are stored in [./data/SPLOT/SPLOT-NEW/SPLOT-txt](./data/SPLOT/SPLOT-NEW/SPLOT-txt) and [./data/SPLOT/SPLOT-NEW/SPLOT-txtconstraints](./data/SPLOT/SPLOT-NEW/SPLOT-txtconstraints), that contain respectively the feature models and the extra constraints associated to those.

The transformer from xml to text files is in [./utils/SPLOT-parsing.py](./utils/SPLOT-parsing.py). 

# Results reproduction

All following "metrics" files are pre-configured to reproduce the listed results (figures, tables). Since, all scripts document how to reproduce the results at the end of each script file, you can easily switch which results to reproduce within the file itself.

## Results for Chapter 4 (Combinatorial Interaction Testing)

CIT test generation and test augmentation are in the folder [./CIT](./CIT). Test suite minimisation (rearrangement) is directly implemented in the data class [./utils/TestSuite](./utils/TestSuite.py).

To reproduce the main results of Chapter 4, go into the file [./metrics/CITmetrics.py](./metrics/CITmetrics.py).

1) Table 3.7  (2 optimisations: filtering core features/contexts, and propagation of values using SAT propagation)

2) Fig. 3.2 and Fig. 3.3 (test suite augmentation, influence of hyperparameter S)

3) Table 3.11 and Table 3.12 (all metrics that show the cost of using our test suite augmentation)

4) The data collected during our quasi-experiment Section 3.5 are in [./data/questionnaire_data](./data/questionnaire_data)

## Results for Chapter 5 (Combinatorial Transition Testing)

CTT test generation (with optimisations) is in the folder [./CTT](./CTT).

To reproduce the main results of Chapter 5, go into the file [./metrics/CTTmetrics.py](./metrics/CTTmetrics.py).
It is pre-configured to reproduce all following results. You can go easily switch which results to reproduce within the file.

1) Table 4.4 (Impact of improvements on the Risk Information System)
2) Figure 4.3 and 4.4 (look-ahead and comparative improvements on SPLOT)
3) Table 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7: all metrics (cost, size, transition coverage, std deviation) from test suites generated by CIT, CTT with all optimisations combinations 

## Results for Chapter 6 (Test Oracle)

The test oracle's alternative execution paths generation is in the folder [./TestOracle](./TestOracle). In particular, the SMT solver (z3) is implemented in the class [./TestOracle/OracleSolver.py](./TestOracle/OracleSolver.py).

1) Table 5.2 (all metrics for the test oracle)
2) Figure 5.2 (Evolution of the total number of intermediate configuration in altnerative execution paths for different values of N)

## Results for Chapter 7 (Fault Localisation)

The Fault Localisation scheme is in the folder [./ErrorIsolation](./ErrorIsolation). 
More specifically, the "group initialisation" strategy is implemented in the method "get_groups". 
The "divide-and-conquer phase" is implemented in the method "generate_paths". 
Finally, the "evaluation phase" is done through an SMT solver call in "generate_paths", 
whereas the SMT solver constraints are defined as parameters in ErrorIsolation and instantiated through the z3 solver in the class [./TestOracle/OracleSolver.py](./TestOracle/OracleSolver.py).

### Results from the MAM

The running Example, the Medical Appointment Manager (MAM), is used to illustrate with a partial test suite in Table 6.1. 
The full test suite and its alternative execution paths are stored in 
[test suite](./data/MedicalAppointmentManager/TestSuitesCTT/runningexample1.pkl)
and [alternative execution paths](./data/MedicalAppointmentManager/AlternativePaths/runningexample-alts-6.pkl).

Since these files are pickled files, the file [metrics/MAM.py](metrics/MAM.py) contains code to retrieve them and un-pickle them in method "printRunningExampleTestSuite".
This file also allows to reproduce the following results, from Section 6.5 - Validation: 
1) _Group initialisation validation_: All metrics when performing error isolation with a single group VS the proposed group initialisation
2) _Hyperparameter N_: Generation time comparison when performing error isolation with two different N (in the paper, N=12 and N=16 are used to highlight explosive growth)

### Validation using SPLOT

All results can be replicated in the file [./metrics/ErrorIsolation_metrics.py](./metrics/ErrorIsolation_metrics.py).

1) Figure 6.2 (the evolution of the number of feature (de)activations with the number of features)
2) Figure 6.4 (the evolution of size and number of SMT calls with the number of features, both with and without group initialisation). It also computes the coefficients of determination (R²) for approximation with a polynomial of degree 2, as mentioned in the paper.
3) Table 6.2: The method "table_all_stats_SPLOT" reproduces all results from Table 6.2, which aggregates statistics when performing our Error Isolation strategy across all feature models.
